---
title: "Allentown at the end of the universe"
date: 2024-08-06T11:04:15-04:00
subtitle: "And Atlanta at the beginning of the next one"
category: "Essay"
source_url: "https://gautamiyer.substack.com/p/allentown-at-the-end-of-the-universe"
hero_image: ""
---

A couple of weeks ago, I drove through Allentown, PA with a few friends. The very first thing we saw, on the thoroughly deracinated outskirts of town, was a bulldozer, blindly pummeling the remains of a not-too-ancient Art Deco building. The building’s relatively austere façade was marked only by a vertical column of terra cotta tiles, each adorned with a vaguely agrarian motif. Early 20th century, but lacking the ornamentation and splendor of the Art Deco of the Roaring 20s.This building embodied a sort of humility, a more muted, resolute aspiration than that of, say, the Chrysler Building, whose opulence hints at the grotesque accumulations of capital that partially caused the Great Depression the very year it was completed.The façade of what I later found out was the Lehigh Valley Dairy building sat next to an enormous clump of skin and bones, a decaying inner skeleton of the building that grew with every swipe of the bulldozer’s arm; for the sentimental, a visceral manifestation of the hopes and dreams of the Lehigh Valley Cooperative Farmers, who completed the building in 1934 at the height of the depression.These types of scenes dominate Allentown’s built environment. A former industrial giant that once produced the world’s first transistor, it has since been abandoned in favor of Jeni’s Splendid Ice Creams a few hours down the way in New York. As we drove through the city, we saw the vagaries of 250 years of history etched onto the fading husks of once-splendid buildings and factories.In Allentown, and throughout the deindustrialized Rust Belt, history is legible. More precisely, it is articulated clearly in the built environment, because the built environment in industrial America reflects relatively simple relations of production. The late 19th and early 20th centuries in American history - all the way to World War 2, even - pitted increasingly precarious masses of laborers against a shrinking pool of wealthy industrialists. These Gilded Age robber barons sought to sanctify their divine right to capitalist oligarchy in temples to human achievement.The Chrysler Building, which remains today the tallest brick building in the world*, was commissioned by Walter Chrysler, whose burgeoning automobile business made him one of the wealthiest men in the world and Time’s Man of the Year in 1928. The Gothic gargoyles, marble and granite floors, and stainless steel exteriors could not have been purchased by Mr. Chrysler without the wealth afforded to him by the massive exploitation of his factory lines; they could not have been assembled into a soaring, globally iconic building in three years without analogously explicit relations of production. In its form, material, and construction - in its totality - the Chrysler Building embodies a particular historical moment and the relations of production that defined that moment.The Lehigh Valley Dairy building stands in for newly defined relations of production in much the same way: New Deal politics answered the conspicuous (over)consumption that precipitated the depression with a robust labor movement, whose collectivist ethos finds form in a tempered Art Deco farmhouse.Throughout Allentown, we found evidence of the excesses of early 20th century America - gorgeous Art Deco buildings and monumental smokestacks - as well as of the New Deal decade that followed. In every case, the built environment tells a succinct story about the organization of society at the time. History bleeds out from the shattered windows and rusting warehouses, compelling all who pass through to conceive of a time before Charles Schwab.Today, our economy does not rust. Finance capital does not corrode; real estate speculation does not wither away and haunt the shadows of forsaken towns. Our relations of production - the very gears of power - are opaque.I’ve been back in Atlanta for a couple of weeks now. Since moving here, I’ve wondered why this place even exists. It’s one of the only major American cities that does not sit on a major body of water, and it has no history as an industrial hub. And, lest we theorize it akin to other Southern cities, the slaveholding accumulation of its early history was burnt to the ground in the Civil War (though not entirely, as the recent Buckhead secession movement suggests). The city was founded as the terminus of the Atlantic rail line (hence, “Atlanta”), but that does not explain why there are now nearly seven million people living in the Atlanta metro area.Ultimately, there is no material base of production anchoring Atlanta to its soil. The early accretion of capital in modern Atlanta prefigured its growth as a corporate bastion, home to titanic companies like Coca-Cola, Delta, and Home Depot, that offer scant evidence of geographic kinship. In fact, Atlanta’s post-war positioning as the “city too busy to hate,” miles ahead of any other Southern city in desegregating its population, was due in large part to the ability of its elite white capitalist class to see the end of corporate growth as fundamentally incompatible with segregation (more on this another day).At any rate, Atlanta’s built environment reflects (and maintains) this underlying economic structure - a city built by business. To follow Atlanta’s skyline North from Downtown is to follow the gradual migration of wealth and the corresponding abstractions of the relations of production to an uncertain, indecipherable end.Many of the buildings that dominate Downtown were designed by the controversial architect John Portman amid an effort by city leaders to position Atlanta as an international business hub for ~two decades from the late 70s to the late 90s. They are mostly postmodern, detached from any singular architectural style, to reflect this grand, globe-spanning ambition. No building captures the eclectic hodgepodge (and, ultimately, the lack of local architectural vernacular) more than Truist Plaza, the second-tallest building in Atlanta.Truist rises from relative nothingness and imposes its stark, unfriendly verticality on everything beneath it. It directly expresses the abstraction embedded in the profit-making strategies of its owner, Truist Bank. The Chrysler Building, again, articulates a clear relationship between its industrial-era capitalist commissioner and the workers who bled for his accumulation, one that is immediately legible even to 21st-century Americans who are largely removed from that relationship. Truist, which profits from the abstractions of finance capital (insurance, loans, etc.), has nothing to disclose, other than that it is a financial institution.If the Downtown buildings suggest abstraction from the relations of production, the buildings ten minutes North in Midtown go a step further to actively obscure relations of production. Take One Atlantic Center, the tallest building in Midtown and the driving force behind the development of Midtown from the 90s to today. Initially built as IBM’s Southeastern headquarters, One Atlantic borrows elements of Gothic, Art Deco, and modernist architecture, proposing an incoherent set of economic relationships that might confuse even the most astute reader of architectural history. Today, One Atlantic houses such distinguished tenants as Equifax, KPMG, and at least six different elite law firms that protect the international holdings of the local bourgeois. The capital inside the halls of One Atlantic is truly diffuse, anticipating 21st-century neoliberalism in a building that hints at several relations of production and embodies none of them.Finally, we arrive at the hellish modernism of Buckhead, where the glass-clad office buildings offer us an acute metaphor for the final abstractions of capital. Buckhead’s towers, built almost entirely in the 21st century, reflect the attention of the viewer back outwards - nothing to see here! Whereas the celebrated glass architecture of downtown Chicago interfaces seamlessly with its built and natural environment, the unflinching, isolated architecture of Buckhead can only reflect itself and the subjugation of popular agency to the will of capital. No wonder, then, that despite boasting an absurdly high quality of life, there is nothing at all to do in Buckhead**.Places like Allentown, then, feel almost like the last sites of historical legibility in America; in a sense, the end of the universe. Marx posited almost 200 years ago that capital begets capital; what’s happened since then, as sites of capital accumulation have taken the elevator up to the 100th floor, is that abstraction has begotten abstraction. At the bleeding edge of modern capital (i.e., the Western world) is a tendency towards illegibility, not born from a desire to efface history but of a complete and total agnosticism towards history.There will come a moment in our near future when America is rudely awakened to the fact that there is in fact no material base of production left here, Atlanta’s ever-Northwards skyline being the harbinger of doom. The moneybags in our hands are financial derivatives of low-income mortgages or Chilean Lithium that could easily be piles of dust; glass, really, is just hot sand.*Cheating slightly, because it’s the tallest brick building in the world with a steel frame**There’s a book to be written about how Buckhead is straining under the contradictions of capitalism and land use in the US, with its ghastly chimera of entrenched white homeownership, corporate control, and antagonism towards the city of Atlanta (the economic engine that is its lifeblood); in essence, the California recipe but with Southern white people instead of Californians. But for another time.
