---
title: "An Ode to J Dilla and Donuts"
date: 2023-09-28T17:01:25-04:00
subtitle: "And maybe briefly to Bob Dylan"
category: "Essay"
source_url: "https://gautamiyer.substack.com/p/an-ode-to-j-dilla-and-donuts"
hero_image: ""
---

For years, I’ve wanted to write about J Dilla’s Donuts, a work so special to me and other Dilla fans that it’s assumed a certain mythos, replete with its own creation myths, rituals, and heretics. I’ve started writing about Donuts many times, and each time I’ve run into a problem that must always exasperate those who write about great art: how do I capture in words something that transcends language?Donuts was made, at least partially, by a man lying on his deathbed. J Dilla (born James Dewitt Yancey), by 2006 a revered, unflappable producer and rapper from Detroit, had contracted a rare blood disease and sat in his hospital bed digging through records and programming his MPC. As the legend goes, his mother spent his last days with him bringing him donuts and massaging his swollen fingers so that he could finish the record.From a primordial soup of 60’s soul samples and Brazilian grooves, Dilla birthed a stunning testament to his humanity. Donuts is in turn masterfully crafted and deeply imperfect, cacophonous and muted, tortuous and blunt, and, ultimately, a deeply human work. In writing about Donuts previously, I missed that very fundamental truth: that Donuts is best understood first as a full body of work, greater than the sum of its parts. The music of course merits its own prose, but beginning any discussion of Donuts by dissecting the nuances of Dilla’s time signatures is a disservice to its pulsing heart.Dilla’s own story - that of a lifelong musician supported always by a loyal group of friends and family, that of man from a city that once lived gloriously and was then left behind, proudly marching to its own beat, that also of a rapper firmly within and indebted to the tradition of hip-hop - is at the center of this album, but it’s the voices and instrumental flourishes of a million records at its periphery that elevate Dilla’s singular experience to a universal testimony. To listen to Donuts is to confront the crushing weight and awesome liberation of a single man’s imminent passing, but it is also so much more.“Walkinonit,” towards the end of the record, extracts mostly just a short phrase, “broken and blue” from Dionne Warwick’s 1963 hit “Walk On By.” The sample echoes around light, shimmering strings, “broken and blue… broken and blue,” for the entirety of the song’s runtime, its three words repeated like a hypnotic chant and punctuated only by a brief rap sample: “b-b-bring the heat!”.In Warwick’s song, the narrator is “broken and blue” when she passes by her former love on the street; on “Walkinonit,” there’s no additional context to help us understand why someone might be “broken and blue.” If you know the original sample, you might ascribe that hurt to heartbreak; if you know the context behind Donuts, you might attribute that brokenness to Dilla’s own ephemerality; if you know nothing at all, you might feel that dull, thumping sadness that afflicts everyone from time to time. Donuts sustains the emotional weight not just of a dying man or its myriad samples but also of its listeners, mapping our own experiences onto a bizarre and wonderful sound collage.After briefly immersing us in the airy melancholy of Warwick’s voice, Dilla gives us “The Factory,” which trudges forward for almost a minute and a half through a discomforting world of air raid sirens, plodding machinery, and stilted, ominous vocal clips. “Walkinonit” comprises mostly just a single looped vocal sample, whereas “The Factory” is built on an off-kilter, mechanical instrumental sample. It’s deliberately discombobulating, highlighting the contrast between the empathy offered by the human voice and our alienation in modern industrial society.Donuts, then, is concerned not just with the joys and sorrows of life but the modern conditions that engender those emotions: the insidious monotony of “The Factory,” the commodity fetishism of “Workinonit,” the bewildering futuristic impulse of “Lightworks” - it’s not the music of Donuts that’s strange as much as the world it inhabits. Donuts is fascinated by the world; it revels in its oddities and contradictions, its gruff and cherub voices, its serendipitous melodies and harmonies.In the hands of a lesser musician, this sort of record could collapse under the weight of its own insistence, its unrelenting assault on the human senses. But underlying its existential weight are the same tendencies that made Dilla one of the most celebrated hip-hop producers of all time. The music is irresistible.Allied with strange, marauding baselines that range from pillar-thick on “The Factory” to noticeably subdued on “Dilla Says Go,” Dilla’s signature thumping kicks and syncopated drum breaks dominate the album. He never tried to take the dusty, rattling edge off of his samples, just like he never tried to anchor his off-kilter drum programs to a metronome (a technique known as “quantizing”; he often went so far as to pull drums just out of time). The result is a set of unconventional rap beats that make your trunk rattle and your head spin. They’re perfectly imperfect, their deliberate griminess hinting at the souls behind the fingers that spun them.Sometimes I’ll especially notice that the kicks on “The Diff’rence” follow no standard pattern, and sometimes something in my brain is able to catch that nonsensical pocket perfectly and set my head bobbing in the horizontal plane. Donuts doesn’t demand its listeners’ emotional participation - it dazzles, surprises, and confounds its way into its listeners’ spirit, thereafter inviting them to feel the humanity inherent to its music.I reframed my understanding of Donuts after cozying up to a similarly human warmth on Bob Dylan’s Blood on the Tracks. Blood on the Tracks is often discussed as a “break-up album,” but its enduring appeal lies not in any particular emotion or experience, but in the potential universality of any and all human experience. On songs like “Simple Twist of Fate,” Dylan invites you to feel. Nothing less, nothing more. And when I realized that Donuts does much of the same thing, I started to discover that Blood on the Tracks does it in much of the same way: it features a wide (maybe even infinite) cast of characters lightly filtered through a profoundly preoccupied mind (in Dylan’s case, a mind dealing with the trials of love); it is concerned not with masking the impurities in man-made music but with highlighting them, to the effect of creating a sound about as warm and organic as the sun; and its lyrics rarely describe emotions specifically, but also perhaps anything you want as specifically as you feel.And they both affirm, ultimately, not just that life has meaning and is worth living, but that life can be deeply, maybe even spiritually fulfilling, even in the face of death, loss, and sorrow, if we accept and concede to the one humanity that we all share.P.S.- You can listen to Donuts on Youtube (listen to the whole thing in order). The comments on the songs are awesome: - Donuts was released on February 7th, 2006 (Dilla’s 32nd birthday), 3 days before Dilla passed. Accordingly, there’s a lot of debate about the lore of Donuts. Some of it was likely edited and cleared by Jeff Jank, one of the founders of Stone’s Throw Records, the label that released Donuts and many other hip-hop classics. Ultimately, I don’t really care and am happy to succumb to the mythos whenever possible.- Donuts is different from most of J Dilla’s other work, a little less hip-hop and a little more psychedelia, plunderphonics. So while you might correctly say that Dilla’s other work (the beats on Slum Village tapes for example) is more definitively Dilla, I still think Donuts is a signature Dilla project in that it contains many of the musical ideas and innovations that define Dilla. I also think it’s something of a synthesis of all of his previous musical ideas. If you are interested in checking out other Dilla work, try these songs:- J Dilla feat. Common and D’Angelo “So Far to Go”: - Slum Village “Fall in Love”: - Slum Village “Get Dis Money”: - Erykah Badu “Didn’t Cha Know”: - The Pharcyde “Runnin’”: - People have theorized extensively about Dilla’s unique production style, with some musical theorists positing (if not confirming) that he invented an entirely new way of thinking about time in music: Dilla time is “the deliberate juxtaposition of multiple expressions of straight and swing time simultaneously, a conscious cultivation of rhythmic friction for maximum musicality and maximum surprise.”- This article summarizes that thought well, and, as I realized after writing this, echoes many of the sentiments I tried to articulate in this piece:https://thestereovision.com/content/2022/6/18/how-j-dillas-donuts-permanently-reshaped-hip-hop-production- A literal book, “Dilla Time,” about Dilla’s life and his revolutionary work, from which I took the above quote: https://dillati.me
