---
title: "On the Republican debate, laws for thee, and laws for me"
date: 2023-08-28T16:24:45-04:00
subtitle: "The state does a lot of illegal stuff, legally, and Republicans love it"
category: "Essay"
source_url: "https://gautamiyer.substack.com/p/on-the-republican-debate-laws-for"
hero_image: ""
---

The first Republican presidential debate was obviously striking for many reasons. Some of those reasons are easy to understand - exhibit A was skinny Tamil Brahmin Vivek Ganapathy Ramaswamy stitching together a bunch of incoherent political positions to create not a Republican candidate but an anti-candidate, someone you’d vote for only to vote against something. I know we’ve had Indians in national politics, but they’ve always done the obligatory whitewashing (e.g. Piyush “Bobby” (???) Jindal) and have exploited the large overlap between traditional American conservatism and the traditional Indian immigrant ethos (work hard, detach yourself from society, keep the family close, stay prayed up). Veevehk is different in that he’s not appealing to anybody in particular - just people who want to say “f*ck you” to some vague notion of the governing order of the last few decades. Kinda like Trump, except if Trump had the most hardcore Tamilian name ever and was the actual human embodiment of a rat (Trump is more of a baboon or mandrill to me).So there were a lot of things going on in the debate, enough to almost distract from the more insidious currents flowing through the night.There was, as always, the alarmist framing of every topic: the “crisis in education”; the “crisis at the border”; the crisis in our “Hellhole, hollowed-out cities”; the “China crisis”, etc. A lot of crises. Of course, the candidates not only unflinchingly accepted this framing but gleefully used it as an opportunity to frame themselves as singularly qualified to resolve each crisis.A crisis is both “a time of intense difficulty, trouble, or danger” - and “a time when a difficult or important decision must be made”. Let’s focus on this second definition, which brings me to the work of Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben.Agamben’s relevant theories here focus on the nature of the law, and the state’s monopoly over the administration and enforcement of the law. The state and its institutions are theoretically subject to the same laws as its people, but the state gets to determine who falls under the purview of the law, and, critically, who does not (and when they do not).During the Iraq and Afghanistan Wars, the wretched Bush admin created the “enemy combatant” category to exempt itself from any of the legal statutes previously governing engagement between the state and its prisoners of war. Accordingly, enemy combatants are given none of the protections guaranteed (usually) to prisoners of war by the Geneva Convention - the Bush admin legally got to do whatever it wanted to people (the entire premise of Gitmo) simply by establishing a new legal category, one that quickly just became a euphemism for alleged Al Qaeda or Taliban operatives.The power to strip someone down to their “bare life”, as Agamben calls the state of being placed outside of the legal order, is uniquely vested in the state. In order to justify this new legal category (which in its existence negates the validity of any previous legal doctrine), the state must invent a circumstance that could reasonably allow for the suspension of the previous legal doctrine.This is what Agamben calls the state of exception. Say I’m on a diet. I’m following a set of rules on this diet. But then I have a particularly hard workout, and I get a hankering to house 7 bags of Ruffles, which have ridges. I suspend the rules of my diet and house 7 bags of Ruffles because I created a state of exception (my exercise) that merited a new set of rules. Similarly, the state does this to create new rules of engagement when it wants to.Every “crisis” proffered to Republican candidates on the debate stage was a gift-wrapped state of exception, which the candidates used to suggest extrajudicial action against relevant groups of people. Consider these cases:DeSantis wants to send troops to Mexico to stop them from “sending fentanyl over our border”. This means indiscriminately using the good old enemy combatant label (or a new, more chic variant) likely at the cost of Mexican civilian lives. His ideas were echoed by several on stage.Candidates in general want to beef up and further militarize the police to stop “drug addicts” (read: homeless people) from terrorizing (read: sleeping on) our streets. The state will take people that it has failed to support, incarcerate them, and likely create a new legal framework to deal with them after labeling them “anti-social,” “drug addicts,” or the like.This is nothing new or surprising. The Bush admin implemented martial law (tons of illegal, largely racialized violence occurred after the fact) in NOLA after Katrina. The Trump admin used ISIS to push for the “Muslim Ban” (considered by many legal scholars at the time to be illegal). You could argue that the most consequential government policy pretty much always happens after the creation of some state of exception (COVID response, 08 crisis response, etc.). Etc etc.But what was striking, I guess, was the way in which pretty much every candidate’s response to “crisis” invoked some desire (if not an outright right) to work outside of the existing legal framework. Not only does every crisis suggest a state of exception -  every legal response to a state exception immediately involves the tossing out of legal precedent and the stripping down of some group to their bare life.I’m too young to remember whether campaigns in the 2000’s and early 2010’s had the same tone, but it seems to me that much of the prevailing political current (within the GOP, in this instance) appears to be focused very explicitly, in a newly normalized manner on creating one set of rules for capital owners (and, sometimes, just white people), and a totally different set of rules for everybody else. Law and order, but we’ll make new laws and new orders to deal with the undesirables.
