---
title: "The California Story"
date: 2023-09-08T20:27:50-04:00
subtitle: "is a very American story"
category: "Essay"
source_url: "https://gautamiyer.substack.com/p/the-california-story"
hero_image: ""
---

I wanted to write about San Francisco, but I find it difficult to think about San Francisco without thinking about the larger California context first.California is indisputably the biggest and single most important state in the country. Nearly 40 million people live here, about 25% more than live in the next most populous state, Texas. In 2022, it had a GDP of $3.6 trillion, about 1.5 times bigger than the state with the next highest GDP, also Texas, and bigger than every country in the world except the US, Japan, and China (and maybe Germany).Of course, it’s not just financial capital. California is home to a tremendous amount of political (almost 1/5th of all Democratic representatives in the House of Representatives are from California) and cultural (Hollywood) capital.This level of multi-dimensional wealth doesn’t just arise from nothing. Underlying California’s staggering productivity is an economic system that also gives it the unfortunate distinctions of being the state with the greatest homeless population (almost two times more than #2 New York), the state with the most wildfires (by far - almost 50 times as many acres burned in California in 2021 than #2 Colorado), the state with the greatest amount of debt (a pretty meaningless fact but illustrative nonetheless), and so on and so forth.This is the story of California: gargantuan, explosive growth both fueled and shackled by a promiscuous form of capitalism that necessitates, like always, large-scale exploitation and unsustainable development.There are three industries that have had an outsized hand in writing this story: Silicon Valley, Hollywood, and Big Ag. Each of these industries exploded after some novel interplay between capital and unprecedented new technology, but that exact interplay led to unique (but ultimately deeply Californian) sets of class relations and development trajectories.Silicon Valley, the newest of these three industries, is a small stretch of land between San Francisco and San Jose that might just be the richest area in the history of the world. Despite its libertarian-utopian-egalitarian ethos, Silicon Valley is rife with exploitation.At their most obvious, Valley companies that have products with physical components depend on brutal physical exploitation. We all know how badly Amazon’s warehouse workers are exploited for their labor. They make pennies for every hundred dollars of Amazon revenue, are denied basic human rights, and are generally treated like the machines that are constantly threatening to replace them.If we descend the tech food chain towards the raw materials that produce our technologies (including the Apple computer I’m now typing on), we encounter abject misery in the cobalt mines of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which produces 70% of the world’s cobalt. Most of the mines in the DRC were owned by the US until they were sold to China in 2016, rendering the country little more than a limitless supply of labor for Silicon Valley’s most lucrative ventures.But it’s not just physical wage laborers who are exploited - our software engineer friends at Meta, Google, etc. are, compared to their bosses and the VCs that fund them, paid a pittance relative to their value to their companies (scoff if you’d like but this is actually true). Though most would never admit it - tech workers are perhaps the least class-conscious set of workers on the planet - they, too, are workers.And to round out the tour, the entire value proposition of companies like Facebook relies on consumers freely giving out their data to advertisers who pay Facebook hand over fist to subtly influence our tastes and preferences.To sum, the genius of the Valley is less about the brains that created Facebook and Instagram and more about a system of production and investment that:A. Has largely convinced the world that the brute revolutionary potential of Valley ideas is the engine behind the wealth (and not, crucially, exploitation);B. Has capitalized repeatedly on the tendency of the American government to invest heavily in public goods with public funds and then just privatize them (e.g., the creation of the internet);C. Has generated an entire class of high-wage laborers that stand more in solidarity with their bosses than their peers, and;D. Has generated an entire class of low-wage laborers that are so shielded from our purview that we pretend they don’t exist.Because of that bizarre blend of hippie and technocrat impulses that pervades the Valley, we tend to think of it as the opposite of a hub for exploitation. Though the Valley has undoubtedly nurtured companies that have affected humanity for the better, my point here is that a place cannot produce the sheer wealth that the Valley has without relying heavily on labor (and data) in a manner that is at best undervalued and at worst dehumanizing.This system is also unsustainable. The above took too many words, so I will briefly posit that the tech ecosystem is the most boom-and-bust environment in our economic landscape. Consider the dot-com bubble, the tech crash of the last couple of years, crypto, and the great graveyard of once-promising now-defunct companies like SVB, Jawbone, Theranos, Blockbuster, etc. The industry relies on rampant speculation, the continued outsourcing of labor to cheaper realms, and self-insurance, all hallmarks of the unsustainability of modern capitalism.Now we turn our attention South to Hollywood, the entertainment capital of the world. Hollywood is another ostensibly “liberal” place that is also firmly reliant on exploited workers to produce its unrivaled volume of cultural capital.Is there anything more to say about Hollywood’s treatment of its writers and producers than what’s being said by the ongoing strike?Every few years, some technological advance from Silicon Valley comes by to make workers’ jobs more precarious and further detach actual human beings from the process of making content. And around the same time, a major Hollywood studio announces that it’s merging with another one (much to our chagrin, as the Ars Gratia Artis lion fades into obscurity) to consolidate the labor pool and eliminate wage competition. Workers strike, they make marginal improvements on their condition, Hollywood, Silicon Valley, and Wall Street execs chuckle, and the same process is repeated when HBO announces its eighth parallel streaming service.This system is just as unsustainable as the Silicon Valley one, albeit in a different way: Hollywood content is getting progressively worse. I don’t feel that this piece is equipped to properly defend this claim, but I think it’s inarguable that the quality of content coming from Hollywood has plummeted over the last couple of decades and especially within the last few years. We get sequels and reboots and bad TV and content that generally seems to revel in being as close an approximation of artificial intelligence as possible.If you don’t pay the writers, technicians, producers, and everyone else who’s trained in the arts their whole lives to make content about humanity, you get seven new Star Wars TV shows in the last four years. Yes, this is hyperbolic - I’ve enjoyed a lot of content over the last five years, but I’ve also found more content than ever that’s completely devoid of life. Bob Iger and the Hollywood execs continue to pull in record profit, year after year, so why would they care if they’re melting our collective consciousness into a Jabba the Hutt-sized pile of goo?Last, we have Forgotten California - the actual Valley. The California Valley (the San Joaquin Valley, more particularly, which is the Southern 2/3 of the Valley), is the most agriculturally productive region on earth. With just 1% of the agriculturally productive land in the US, the Valley produces 8% of the US’s agricultural output - and this is misleading because much of the other 92% is just mass production of grains in the heartland, alfalfa in the West, etc. A truly mind-boggling amount of what we eat every day comes from the Valley, which produces half of the country’s fruits and vegetables and most of its nuts.Californians did not just stumble upon Eden - they built it. The Valley is long and varied in climate and topography, but it was in many places something like an arid desert. In 1933, local, state, and federal government agencies began one of the great wars of our time - against nature - to turn it all into farmland. Rivers in Northern California and Oregon were systematically dammed, redirected, and altogether eliminated to funnel water into the Valley, with no consequences at all for the state’s natural ecology.Actually, salmon have almost disappeared from Northern California over the course of just 30-40 years, birds have stopped passing through critical migration habitats, and Northern California now experiences a devastating cycle of droughts and floods that are addressed as a series of unending isolated events rather than the systemic result of a very particular set of policy decisions. In short, the engineering of the California Valley, from plains and deserts to America’s plant-based heart, is unsustainable.(It’s not just the Valley that’s been engineered - the entirety of California was modified to make it habitable. When Los Angeles became a thing in the early 20th century, planners funneled water from Lake Owens, a 108 square-mile large lake 200 miles away, to the city. Within 13 years, the lake was completely emptied, and today it’s nothing more than a salty depression in the ground that becomes a pond when it rains. But more on this on another day.)The physical geography of the Valley offers us an apt metaphor for its class divisions. If you drive East from Silicon Valley - say, from San Jose - for about an hour, you cross a minor mountain range and descend into the much larger California Valley. You notice, first, the thick haze that permeates the Valley, a combination of dust kicked up from the dry ground around the farms and smog from the machines that harvest and process the crops of the Valley.Hazardous breathing conditions have become something of a norm in the Valley, because these conditions have been reckoned with as the necessary consequences of feeding America; also, probably, because the Valley is majority-Hispanic, with the highest concentration of undocumented immigrants in the country. The laborers of the Valley constitute a group of people that have been largely left behind by the state and federal governments: they power our national aspirations but are excluded completely from our concept of the nation (in many cases, quite literally).Because the cost of living in the Valley is significantly lower than in the rest of California, statistics regarding poverty rates rarely demonstrate the disparity between the Valley and the rest of California. But many of the poorest cities in the entire country - and, indeed, many of the poorest counties, when controlling for the wealthy upper-class of farm owners - are in the Valley.Cruelly, the most visceral exploitation in California occurs right next door to its capital-flush corridors, but there’s a mountain-sized fence blocking us from viewing it.When people talk about problems in California, they often allude generically to some sort of systemic failure - most commonly that liberals or unchecked leftism or poor people or immigrants are to blame. Of course, this is a weak and cowardly critique. But what’s sad is that exactly the opposite is true.The rich and powerful chart the course of society. What makes California special is that it is home to more rich and powerful people who have access to more aggressive and free-flowing capital than anywhere in the country (maybe even the world), despite also being home to an incredibly diverse and socially liberal population.Hundreds of thousands are homeless in California because that capital was not deployed to support housing and well-being - it was used to produce and protect more capital for the rich and wealthy. California’s forests are annually ravaged by fires because capital was not used to design careful climate mitigation strategies - it was hand-delivered to big agriculture firms that destroyed the natural ecosystem. And the state spends so much money to fix these problems because these problems are fundamentally intractable. To call them problems, even, is to miss the point - exploitation and unsustainability are the pillars of Californian growth.California is always on a pedestal because it is one of the most valuable places on earth, and when it seems to fail, attention is paid not to the fundamental system that produces that value (as is intuitive), but to the perceived laggards within that system who hold it back. Unfortunately, those laggards are often nothing more than Silicon Valley, Hollywood, and Big Ag execs who preach inclusion and tolerance but have never done anything to address the system that creates that pesky permanent underclass that comes back to bite its overlords every few years.This is the context that undergirds San Francisco and its “issues”. Though I’ve skimped on the specifics here and have made some pretty big generalizations, I think this general struggle should help explain why I think San Francisco is the way that it is. More on that later. Peace!
